Relative value analysis has a number of applications.One of the most important applications of 
relative value analysis is relative value trading, in which various securities are bought and 
others sold with the goal of enhancing the risk-adjusted expected return of a trading
book. Identifying relatively rich and relatively cheap securities is
an important skill for a relative value trader, but additional
skills are required to be successful as a relative value
trader. For example, rich securities can and often do
become richer, while cheap securities can and often do
become cheaper. A successful relative value trader needs
to be able to identify some of the reasons that securities
are rich or cheap in order to form realistic expectations
about the likelihood of future richening or cheapening. We
discuss this and other important skills throughout this
book.
Relative value analysis is also an important consideration
when hedging or otherwise immunizing positions against
various risks. For example, consider a flow trader who is
sold a position in ten-year (10Y) French government bonds
by a customer. This trader faces a number of alternatives
for hedging this risk.
He could try to sell the French bond to another client or to
an interdealer broker. He could sell another French bond
with a similar maturity. He could sell Bund futures
contracts or German Bunds with similar maturities. He
could pay fixed in an interest rate swap. He could buy
payer swaptions or sell receiver swaptions with various
strikes. He could sell liquid supranational or agency bonds
issued by entities such as the European Investment Bank.
Depending on his expectations, he might even sell bonds
denominated in other currencies, such as US Treasuries or
UK Gilts. Or he might choose to implement a combination
of these hedging strategies.
In devising a hedging strategy, a skilled trader will
consider the relative valuations of the various securities
that can be used as hedging instruments. If he expects
Bunds to cheapen relative to the alternatives, he may
choose to sell German Bunds as a hedge. And if he believes
Bund futures are likely to cheapen relative to cash Bunds,
he may choose to implement this hedge via futures
contracts rather than in the cash market.
By considering the relative value implications of these
hedging alternatives, a skilled flow trader can enhance the
risk-adjusted expected return of his book. In this way, the
value of the book reflects not only the franchise value of the
customer flow but also the relative value opportunities in
the market and the analytical skills of the trader managing
the book.
Given the increasing competitiveness of running a fixed
income flow business, firms that incorporate relative value
analysis as part of their business can expect to increase
their marginal revenues, allowing them to generate higher
profits and/or to offer liquidity to customers at more
competitive rates.
In many respects, a long-only investment manager faces
many of the same issues as the flow trader in the previous
example. Just as a flow trader can expect to enhance the
risk-adjusted performance of his book by incorporating
relative value analysis into his hedging choices, a long-only
investment manager can expect to enhance the risk-
adjusted performance of his portfolio by incorporating
relative value analysis into his security selection process.
For example, an investment manager who wants to
increase his exposure to the 10Y sector of the EUR debt
market could buy government bonds issued by France,
Germany, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, or any of the other
EMU member states. Or he could buy Bund futures or
receive fixed in a EURIBOR or ESTR interest rate swap. Or
he might buy a US Treasury in conjunction with a cross currency basis swap, thereby synthetically creating a US
government bond denominated in euros.
An investment manager who incorporates relative value
analysis as part of his investment process is likely to
increase his alpha and therefore over time to outperform an
otherwise similar manager with the same beta who doesn't
incorporate relative value analysis.